releases: add TiDB 7.1.0 release notes (preview version) (#13240)
pingcap/docs: releases/release-7.1.0.md

In v7.1.0, the key new features and improvements are as follows:

<table>
<thead>
  <tr>
    <th>Category</th>
    <th>Feature</th>
    <th>Description</th>
  </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
    <td rowspan="2">Scalability and Performance</td>
    <td>Session level <a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/dev/sql-non-prepared-plan-cache" target="_blank">non-prepared plan cache</a> (GA)</td>
    <td>Support automatically reusing plan cache at the session level to reduce compilation and shorten the query time for the same SQL patterns without manually setting prepare statements in advance.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td><a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/dev/troubleshoot-hot-spot-issues#scatter-read-hotspots" target="_blank">Load-based replica read</a></td>
    <td>In a read hotspot scenario, TiDB can redirect read requests for a hotspot TiKV node to its replicas. This feature efficiently scatters read hotspots and optimizes the use of cluster resources. To control the threshold for triggering load-based replica read, you can adjust the system variable <code>tidb_load_based_replica_read_threshold</code>.</td>

>   </tr>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td rowspan="1">Reliability and availability</td>
    <td><a href="hhttps://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/dev/tidb-resource-control" target="_blank">Resource control by Resource Groups</a> (GA)</td>
   <td>Support resource management based on resource groups, which maps database users to the corresponding resource groups and sets quotas for each resource group based on actual needs.</td>
 </tr>
```

  <tr>
    <td rowspan="2">SQL</td>
    <td><a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/dev/sql-statement-create-index#multi-valued-index" target="_blank">Multi-valued index</a> (GA)</td>

>     <td>Support MySQL-compatible multi-valued indexes and enhance the JSON type to improve compatibility with MySQL 8.0. This feature improves the efficiency of membership checks on multi-valued columns.</td>

Author: enhance the JSON type means enhance TiDB's support for the JSON type. This is the same as that in [Release 6.6.0](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/dev/release-6.6.0#:~:text=Multi%2Dvalued%20index%20(experimental),improve%20TiDB%27s%20compatibility%20with%20MySQL%208.0.)

Filtering the values of an array in a JSON column is a common operation, but normal indexes cannot help speed up such an operation. If an array in the JSON column has a multi-valued index, you can use the multi-value index to filter the retrieval conditions with some functions, thereby reducing much I/O consumption and improving operation speed.

    For more information, see [documentation](/tidb-resource-control.md).

* Support the checkpoint mechanism for [Fast Online DDL](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg-new-in-v630) to improve fault tolerance and automatic recovery capability [#42164](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42164) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta)

    TiDB v7.1.0 introduces a checkpoint mechanism for [Fast Online DDL](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg-new-in-v630), which significantly improves the fault tolerance and automatic recovery capability of Fast Online DDL. Even in the case of TiDB DDL owner switching, TiDB can still periodically record and synchronize the progress of DDL statements, allowing the new TiDB DDL owner to execute the ongoing DDL statements in Fast Online DDL mode without manually canceling and re-executing the statements. The checkpoint mechanism makes the DDL execution more stable and efficient.

>     For more information, see [documentation](/ddl-introduction.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    For more information, see [documentation](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg-new-in-v630).
```

    Before v7.1.0, Hash and Key partitioned tables in TiDB only support the `TRUNCATE PARTITION` partition management statement. Starting from v7.1.0, Hash and Key partitioned tables also support `ADD PARTITION` and `COALESCE PARTITION` partition management statements. Therefore, you can flexibly adjust the number of partitions in Hash and Key partitioned tables as needed. For example, you can increase the number of partitions with the `ADD PARTITION` statement, or decrease the number of partitions with the `COALESCE PARTITION` statement.

    For more information, see [documentation](/partitioned-table.md#manage-hash-and-key-partitions).

* The syntax of Range INTERVAL partitioning becomes generally available (GA) [#35683](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/35683) @[mjonss](https://github.com/mjonss)

    The syntax of Range INTERVAL partitioning (introduced in v6.3.0) becomes GA. With this syntax, you can define Range partitioning by a desired interval without enumerating all partitions, which drastically reduces the length of Range partitioning DDL statements. The syntax is equivalent to that of the original Range partitioning.

>     For more information, see [documentation](/partitioned-table#range-interval-partitioning).

Author: ```suggestion
    For more information, see [documentation](/partitioned-table.md#range-interval-partitioning).
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/sql-statements/sql-statement-load-data.md).

* Generated columns become generally available (GA) @[bb7133](https://github.com/bb7133) **tw:ran-huang**

    Generated columns are a valuable feature for database. When creating a table, you can define that the value of a column is calculated based on the values of other columns in the table, rather than being explicitly inserted or updated by users. This generated column can be either a virtual column or a stored column. TiDB has supported MySQL-compatible generated columns since earlier versions, and this feature becomes GA in v7.1.0.

    Using generated columns can improve MySQL compatibility for TiDB, simplifying the process of migrating from MySQL. It also reduces data maintenance complexity and improves data consistency and query efficiency.

    For more information, see [documentation](/generated-columns.md).

### DB operations

> * DDL tasks support pause and resume operations (experimental) [#18015](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/18015) @[godouxm](https://github.com/godouxm) **tw:ran-huang**
> 
>     Before TiDB v7.1.0, when a DDL task encounters a business peak period during execution, you can only manually cancel the DDL task to reduce its impact on the business. In v7.1.0, TiDB introduces pause and resume operations for DDL tasks. These operations let you pause DDL tasks during peak periods and resume them after the peak ends, thus avoiding any impact on your application workloads.
> 
>     For example, you can pause and resume multiple DDL tasks using [`ADMIN PAUSE DDL JOBS`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-admin-pause-ddl.md) or [`ADMIN RESUME DDL JOBS`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-admin-resume-ddl.md):
> 
>     ```sql
>     ADMIN PAUSE DDL JOBS 1,2;
>     ADMIN RESUME DDL JOBS 1,2;
>     ```
> 
>     For more information, see [`ADMIN PAUSE DDL JOBS`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-admin-pause-ddl.md) and [`ADMIN RESUME DDL JOBS`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-admin-resume-ddl.md).

Author: ```suggestion
* DDL tasks support pause and resume operations (experimental) [#18015](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/18015) @[godouxm](https://github.com/godouxm) **tw:ran-huang**

    Before TiDB v7.1.0, when a DDL task encounters a business peak period during execution, you can only manually cancel the DDL task to reduce its impact on the business. In v7.1.0, TiDB introduces pause and resume operations for DDL tasks. These operations let you pause DDL tasks during peak periods and resume them after the peak ends, thus avoiding any impact on your application workloads.

    For example, you can pause and resume multiple DDL tasks using `ADMIN PAUSE DDL JOBS` or `ADMIN RESUME DDL JOBS`:

    ```sql
    ADMIN PAUSE DDL JOBS 1,2;
    ADMIN RESUME DDL JOBS 1,2;
    ```

    For more information, see [documentation](/ddl-introduction.md#ddl-related-commands).
```
@ran-huang PTAL

| [`tidb_opt_enable_late_materialization`](/system-variables.md#tidb_opt_enable_late_materialization-new-in-v700) | Modified | Changes the default value from `OFF` to `ON`, meaning that the TiFlash late materialization feature is enabled by default. |
| [`tidb_enable_dist_task`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_dist_task-new-in-v710) | Newly added | Controls whether to enable the distributed execution framework. After enabling distributed execution, DDL, Import and other supported backend tasks will be jointly completed by multiple TiDB nodes in the cluster. This variable was renamed from `tidb_ddl_distribute_reorg`. |
| [`tidb_enable_non_prepared_plan_cache_for_dml`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_non_prepared_plan_cache_for_dml-new-in-v710) | Newly added | Controls whether to enable the [Non-prepared plan cache](/sql-non-prepared-plan-cache.md) feature for DML statements. |
| [`tidb_opt_fix_control`](/system-variables.md#tidb_opt_fix_control-new-in-v710) | Newly added | This variable provides a more fine-grained control over the optimizer and helps to prevent performance regression after upgrading caused by behavior changes in the optimizer. |

> | [`tidb_plan_cache_invalidation_on_fresh_stats `](/system-variables.md#tidb_plan_cache_invalidation_on_fresh_stats-new-in-v710) | Newly added | Controls whether to invalidate the plan cache automatically when statistics on related tables are updated. |

Author: ```suggestion
| [`tidb_plan_cache_invalidation_on_fresh_stats`](/system-variables.md#tidb_plan_cache_invalidation_on_fresh_stats-new-in-v710) | Newly added | Controls whether to invalidate the plan cache automatically when statistics on related tables are updated. |
```

| [`tidb_session_plan_cache_size`](/system-variables.md#tidb_session_plan_cache_size-new-in-v710) | Newly added | Controls the maximum number of plans that can be cached. Prepared plan cache and non-prepared plan cache share the same cache. |

### Configuration file parameters

| Configuration file | Configuration parameter | Change type | Description |
| -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- |
| TiDB | [`lite-init-stats`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#lite-init-stats-new-in-v710) | Newly added | Controls whether to use lightweight statistics initialization during TiDB startup. |
| PD | [`store-limit-version`](/pd-configuration-file.md#store-limit-version-new-in-v710) | Newly added | Controls the mode of store limit. Value options are `"v1"` and `"v2"`. |
| TiFlash | `http_port` | Deleted | Deprecates the HTTP service port (default `8123`). |

> | TiCDC | [`sink.enable-partition-separator`](/ticdc/ticdc-changefeed-config.md#cli-and-configuration-parameters-of-ticdc-changefeeds) | Modified | Changes the default value from `false` to `true` after further tests, meaning that partitions in a table are stored in separate directories by default. It is recommended that you keep the value as `true` to avoid the data loss issue. |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| TiCDC | [`sink.enable-partition-separator`](/ticdc/ticdc-changefeed-config.md#cli-and-configuration-parameters-of-ticdc-changefeeds) | Modified | Changes the default value from `false` to `true` after further tests, meaning that partitions in a table are stored in separate directories by default. It is recommended that you keep the value as `true` to avoid the potential issue of data loss during replication of partitioned tables to storage services. |
```

> ## Improvements

Reviewer: These should be rolled into the domains above. The first would be under Scalability and the second under Performance.

+ TiFlash

>     - Improve TiFlash performance and stability in the disaggregated storage and compute architecture [#6882](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6882)  @[JaySon-Huang](https://github.com/JaySon-Huang) @[breezewish](https://github.com/breezewish) @[JinheLin](https://github.com/JinheLin)

Reviewer: I think this one is pushing into the next release, right?

---
title: TiDB 7.1.0 Release Notes
summary: Learn about the new features, compatibility changes, improvements, and bug fixes in TiDB 7.1.0.
---

# TiDB 7.1.0 Release Notes

TiDB version: 7.1.0 (upcoming)

> **Note:**
>
> TiDB v7.1.0 is not yet available. This release note is a preview version to provide insights into upcoming features and is subject to change. The features outlined here are not guaranteed to be included in the final release.

In v7.1.0, the key new features and improvements are as follows:

<table>
<thead>
  <tr>
    <th>Category</th>
    <th>Feature</th>
    <th>Description</th>
  </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
    <td rowspan="2">Scalability and Performance</td>

>     <td><a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/dev/sql-non-prepared-plan-cache" target="_blank">Session-level plan cache for non-prepared plans</a> (GA)</td>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    <td><a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/dev/sql-non-prepared-plan-cache" target="_blank">Session-level plan cache for non-prepared statements</a> (GA)</td>
```

    <td>Support automatically reusing plan cache at the session level to remove query planning time, reducing query time for repeat SQL patterns without manually setting prepare statements in advance.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td><a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/dev/troubleshoot-hot-spot-issues#scatter-read-hotspots" target="_blank">Load-based replica read</a></td>
    <td>In a read hotspot scenario, TiDB can redirect read requests for a hotspot TiKV node to its replicas. This feature efficiently scatters read hotspots and optimizes the use of cluster resources. To control the threshold for triggering load-based replica read, you can adjust the system variable <a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/dev/system-variables#tidb_load_based_replica_read_threshold-new-in-v700" target="_blank"><code>tidb_load_based_replica_read_threshold</code></a>.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td rowspan="1">Reliability and availability</td>

>     <td><a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/dev/tidb-resource-control" target="_blank">Resource control by Resource Groups</a> (GA)</td>

Author: ```suggestion
    <td><a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/dev/tidb-resource-control" target="_blank">Resource control by resource groups</a> (GA)</td>
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/tidb-resource-control.md).

* Support the checkpoint mechanism for [Fast Online DDL](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg-new-in-v630) to improve fault tolerance and automatic recovery capability [#42164](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42164) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta)

    TiDB v7.1.0 introduces a checkpoint mechanism for [Fast Online DDL](/ddl-introduction.md), which significantly improves the fault tolerance and automatic recovery capability of Fast Online DDL. Even if the TiDB owner node is restarted or changed due to failures, TiDB can still recover progress from checkpoints that are automatically updated on a regular basis, making the DDL execution more stable and efficient.

    For more information, see [documentation](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg-new-in-v630).

> * Backup & Restore supports checkpoint restore [#issue](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/issue) @[Leavrth](https://github.com/Leavrth)

Author: ```suggestion
* Backup & Restore supports checkpoint restore [#42339](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42339) @[Leavrth](https://github.com/Leavrth)
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/br/br-checkpoint-restore.md).

* Optimize the strategy of loading statistics [#42160](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42160) @[xuyifangreeneyes](https://github.com/xuyifangreeneyes)

    Enabling synchronous loading of statistics can significantly reduce the number of statistics that must be loaded during startup, thus improving the speed of loading statistics. This feature increases the stability of TiDB in complex runtime environments and reduces the impact of individual TiDB nodes restart on the overall service.

    For more information, see [documentation](/statistics.md#load-statistics).

### SQL

* Support saving TiFlash query results using the `INSERT INTO SELECT` statement (GA) [#37515](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/37515) @[gengliqi](https://github.com/gengliqi)

    Starting from v6.5.0, TiDB supports pushing down the `SELECT` clause (analytical query) of the `INSERT INTO SELECT` statement to TiFlash. In this way, you can easily save the TiFlash query result to a TiDB table specified by `INSERT INTO` for further analysis, which takes effect as result caching (that is, result materialization).

>     In v7.1.0, this feature is generally available. During the execution of the `SELECT` clause in the `INSERT INTO SELECT` statement, the optimizer can intelligently decide whether to push a query down to TiFlash based on the [SQL mode](/sql-mode.md) and the cost estimates of the TiFlash replica. Therefore, the `tidb_enable_tiflash_read_for_write_stmt` system variable introduced during the experimental phase is now deprecated. Note that the computation rules of `INSERT INTO SELECT` statements for TiFlash do not meet the `STRICT SQL Mode` requirement, so TiDB allows the `SELECT` clause in the `INSERT INTO SELECT` statement to be pushed down to TiFlash only when the [SQL Mode](/sql-mode.md) of the current session is not strict, which means that the `sql_mode` value does not contain `STRICT_TRANS_TABLES` and `STRICT_ALL_TABLES`.

Author: ```suggestion
    In v7.1.0, this feature is generally available. During the execution of the `SELECT` clause in the `INSERT INTO SELECT` statement, the optimizer can intelligently decide whether to push a query down to TiFlash based on the [SQL mode](/sql-mode.md) and the cost estimates of the TiFlash replica. Therefore, the `tidb_enable_tiflash_read_for_write_stmt` system variable introduced during the experimental phase is now deprecated. Note that the computation rules of `INSERT INTO SELECT` statements for TiFlash do not meet the `STRICT SQL Mode` requirement, so TiDB allows the `SELECT` clause in the `INSERT INTO SELECT` statement to be pushed down to TiFlash only when the [SQL mode](/sql-mode.md) of the current session is not strict, which means that the `sql_mode` value does not contain `STRICT_TRANS_TABLES` and `STRICT_ALL_TABLES`.
```

    For example, you can pause and resume multiple DDL tasks using `ADMIN PAUSE DDL JOBS` or `ADMIN RESUME DDL JOBS`:

    ```sql
    ADMIN PAUSE DDL JOBS 1,2;
    ADMIN RESUME DDL JOBS 1,2;
    ```

    For more information, see [documentation](/ddl-introduction.md#ddl-related-commands).

### Observability

* Enhance optimizer diagnostic information [#43122](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/43122) @[time-and-fate](https://github.com/time-and-fate)

    Obtaining sufficient information is the key to SQL performance diagnostics. In v7.1.0, TiDB continues to add optimizer runtime information to various diagnostic tools, providing better insights into how execution plans are selected and assisting in troubleshooting SQL performance issues. The new information includes:

    * `debug_trace.json` in the output of [`PLAN REPLAYER`](/sql-plan-replayer.md).
    * Partial statistics details for `operator info` in the output of [`EXPLAIN`](/explain-walkthrough.md).

>     * Partial statistics details in the `Stats` field of [`slow-queries`](/identify-slow-queries.md).

Author: ```suggestion
    * Partial statistics details in the `Stats` field of [slow queries](/identify-slow-queries.md).
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/sql-statements/sql-statement-create-index.md#multi-valued-index).

* Improve the partition management for Hash and Key partitioned tables [#42728](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42728) @[mjonss](https://github.com/mjonss) **tw:qiancai**

    Before v7.1.0, Hash and Key partitioned tables in TiDB only support the `TRUNCATE PARTITION` partition management statement. Starting from v7.1.0, Hash and Key partitioned tables also support `ADD PARTITION` and `COALESCE PARTITION` partition management statements. Therefore, you can flexibly adjust the number of partitions in Hash and Key partitioned tables as needed. For example, you can increase the number of partitions with the `ADD PARTITION` statement, or decrease the number of partitions with the `COALESCE PARTITION` statement.

    For more information, see [documentation](/partitioned-table.md#manage-hash-and-key-partitions).

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Range INTERVAL partitioning become generally available (GA) [#35683](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/35683) @[mjonss](https://github.com/mjonss) **tw:qiancai**

    In v6.3.0, TiDB provides [INTERVAL partitioning](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/dev/partitioned-table#range-interval-partitioning) as a new way of defining Range partitions. You do not need to enumerate all partitions, which drastically reduces the length of Range partitioning DDL statements. The syntax is equivalent to that of the original Range partitioning.

    In v7.1.0, Range INTERVAL partitioning is now GA.
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/sql-statements/sql-statement-create-index.md#multi-valued-index).

* Improve the partition management for Hash and Key partitioned tables [#42728](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42728) @[mjonss](https://github.com/mjonss) **tw:qiancai**

    Before v7.1.0, Hash and Key partitioned tables in TiDB only support the `TRUNCATE PARTITION` partition management statement. Starting from v7.1.0, Hash and Key partitioned tables also support `ADD PARTITION` and `COALESCE PARTITION` partition management statements. Therefore, you can flexibly adjust the number of partitions in Hash and Key partitioned tables as needed. For example, you can increase the number of partitions with the `ADD PARTITION` statement, or decrease the number of partitions with the `COALESCE PARTITION` statement.

    For more information, see [documentation](/partitioned-table.md#manage-hash-and-key-partitions).

> * Range INTERVAL partitioning become generally available (GA) [#35683](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/35683) @[mjonss](https://github.com/mjonss) **tw:qiancai**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

* Range INTERVAL partitioning become generally available (GA) [#35683](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/35683) @[mjonss](https://github.com/mjonss) **tw:qiancai**
```

>     In v6.3.0, TiDB provides INTERVAL partitioning as a new way of defining Range partitions. You do not need to enumerate all partitions, which drastically reduces the length of Range partitioning DDL statements. The syntax is equivalent to that of the original Range partitioning.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    The syntax of Range INTERVAL partitioning introduced in v6.3.0 becomes GA. With this syntax, you can define partitioning by rules without enumerating all partitions, which drastically reduces the length of Range partitioning DDL statements. The syntax is equivalent to that of the original Range partitioning.
```

>     In v7.1.0, Range INTERVAL partitioning is now GA.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    In v7.1.0, Range INTERVAL partitioning is now GA.
    
    For more information, see [documentation](/partitioned-table.md#manage-hash-and-key-partitions).

```

    For more information, see [documentation](/sql-statements/sql-statement-create-index.md#multi-valued-index).

* Improve the partition management for Hash and Key partitioned tables [#42728](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42728) @[mjonss](https://github.com/mjonss) **tw:qiancai**

    Before v7.1.0, Hash and Key partitioned tables in TiDB only support the `TRUNCATE PARTITION` partition management statement. Starting from v7.1.0, Hash and Key partitioned tables also support `ADD PARTITION` and `COALESCE PARTITION` partition management statements. Therefore, you can flexibly adjust the number of partitions in Hash and Key partitioned tables as needed. For example, you can increase the number of partitions with the `ADD PARTITION` statement, or decrease the number of partitions with the `COALESCE PARTITION` statement.

    For more information, see [documentation](/partitioned-table.md#manage-hash-and-key-partitions).

> * The syntax of Range INTERVAL partitioning becomes generally available (GA) [#35683](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/35683) @[mjonss](https://github.com/mjonss) **tw:qiancai**

Reviewer 3: @ran-huang PTAL

>     The syntax of Range INTERVAL partitioning (introduced in v6.3.0) becomes GA. With this syntax, you can define partitioning by a desired interval without enumerating all partitions, which drastically reduces the length of Range partitioning DDL statements. The syntax is equivalent to that of the original Range partitioning.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    The syntax of Range INTERVAL partitioning (introduced in v6.3.0) becomes GA. With this syntax, you can define Range partitioning by a desired interval without enumerating all partitions, which drastically reduces the length of Range partitioning DDL statements. The syntax is equivalent to that of the original Range partitioning.
```

## Compatibility changes

> **Note:**
>
> This section provides compatibility changes you need to know when you upgrade from v7.0.0 to the current version (v7.1.0). If you are upgrading from v6.6.0 or earlier versions to the current version, you might also need to check the compatibility changes introduced in intermediate versions.

### MySQL compatibility

### Behavior changes

* To improve security, TiFlash deprecates the HTTP service port (default `8123`) and uses the gRPC port as a replacement **tw:qiancai**

    If you have upgraded TiFlash to v7.1.0, then during the TiDB upgrade to v7.1.0, TiDB cannot read the TiFlash system tables ([`INFORMATION_SCHEMA.TIFLASH_TABLES`](/information-schema/information- schema-tiflash-tables.md) and [`INFORMATION_SCHEMA.TIFLASH_SEGMENTS`](/information-schema/information-schema-tiflash-segments.md)).

### System variables

| Variable name  | Change type    | Description |
|--------|------------------------------|------|

> |        |                              |      |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `tidb_ddl_distribute_reorg` | Deleted | Renamed to [`tidb_enable_dist_task`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_dist_task-new-in-v710). |
| [`tidb_enable_dist_task`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_dist_task-new-in-v710) | Newly added | Controls whether to enable [the distributed execution framework](/tidb-distributed-execution-framework.md). After enabling distributed execution, DDL, Import and other supported backend tasks will be jointly completed by multiple TiDB nodes in the cluster. This variable was renamed from `tidb_ddl_distribute_reorg`. |
```

    To improve memory utilization, TiDB v7.1.0 merges the cache pools of non-prepared and prepared plan caches. You can control the cache size using the system variable [`tidb_session_plan_cache_size`](/system-variables.md#tidb_session_plan_cache_size-new-in-v710). The [`tidb_prepared_plan_cache_size`](/system-variables.md#tidb_prepared_plan_cache_size-new-in-v610) and [`tidb_non_prepared_plan_cache_size`](/system-variables.md#tidb_non_prepared_plan_cache_size) system variables are deprecated.

    To maintain forward compatibility, when you upgrade from an earlier version to a v7.1.0 or later cluster, the cache size `tidb_session_plan_cache_size` remains the same value as `tidb_prepared_plan_cache_size`, and [`tidb_enable_non_prepared_plan_cache`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_non_prepared_plan_cache) remains the setting before the upgrade. After sufficient performance testing, you can enable non-prepared plan cache using `tidb_enable_non_prepared_plan_cache`. For a newly created cluster, non-prepared plan cache is enabled by default.

    For more information, see [documentation](/sql-non-prepared-plan-cache.md).

### Reliability

> * 资源管控 GA [#38825](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38825) @[nolouch](https://github.com/nolouch) @[BornChanger](https://github.com/BornChanger) @[glorv](https://github.com/glorv) @[tiancaiamao](https://github.com/tiancaiamao) @[Connor1996](https://github.com/Connor1996) @[JmPotato](https://github.com/JmPotato) @[hnes](https://github.com/hnes) @[CabinfeverB](https://github.com/CabinfeverB) @[HuSharp](https://github.com/HuSharp) **tw:hfxsd**
> 
>     TiDB 持续增强资源管控能力，并将这个特性 GA。该特性将会极大地提升 TiDB 集群的资源利用效率和性能表现。资源管控特性的引入对 TiDB 具有里程碑的意义，你可以将一个分布式数据库集群划分成多个逻辑单元，将不同的数据库用户映射到对应的资源组中，并根据需要设置每个资源组的配额。当集群资源紧张时，来自同一个资源组的会话所使用的全部资源将被限制在配额内，避免其中一个资源组过度消耗，从而影响其他资源组中的会话正常运行。
> 
>     该特性也可以将多个来自不同系统的中小型应用合入一个 TiDB 集群中，个别应用的负载提升，不会影响其他应用的正常运行。而在系统负载较低的时候，繁忙的应用即使超过设定的读写配额，也仍然可以被分配到所需的系统资源，达到资源的最大化利用。此外，合理利用资源管控特性可以减少集群数量，降低运维难度及管理成本。
> 
>     在 v7.1.0 中，TiDB 增加了基于实际负载来估算系统容量上限的能力，为客户的容量规划提供了更准确的参考，协助客户更好地管理 TiDB 的资源分配，从而满足企业级场景的稳定性需要。

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* 资源管控 GA [#38825](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38825) @[nolouch](https://github.com/nolouch) @[BornChanger](https://github.com/BornChanger) @[glorv](https://github.com/glorv) @[tiancaiamao](https://github.com/tiancaiamao) @[Connor1996](https://github.com/Connor1996) @[JmPotato](https://github.com/JmPotato) @[hnes](https://github.com/hnes) @[CabinfeverB](https://github.com/CabinfeverB) @[HuSharp](https://github.com/HuSharp) **tw:hfxsd**

    TiDB enhances the resource control feature based on resource groups. This feature becomes GA  in v7.1.0. This feature significantly improves the resource utilization efficiency and performance of TiDB clusters. The introduction of the resource control feature is a milestone for TiDB. You can divide a distributed database cluster into multiple logical units, map different database users to corresponding resource groups, and set the quota for each resource group as needed. When the cluster resources are limited, all resources used by sessions in the same resource group are limited to the quota. In this way, even if a resource group is over-consumed, the sessions in other resource groups are not affected. 

    With this feature, you can combine multiple small and medium-sized applications from different systems into a single TiDB cluster. When the workload of an application grows larger, it does not affect the normal operation of other applications. When the system workload is low, busy applications can still be allocated the required system resources even if they exceed the set read and write quotas, so as to achieve the maximum utilization of resources. In addition, the rational use of the resource control feature can reduce the number of clusters, ease the difficulty of operation and maintenance, and save management costs.

    In TiDB v7.1.0, this feature adds the ability to estimate system capacity caps based on actual workload and hardware deployment. The estimation ability provides you with a more accurate reference for capacity planning and assists you in better managing TiDB resource allocation to meet the stability needs of enterprise-class scenarios.    
```

---
title: TiDB 7.1.0 Release Notes
summary: Learn about the new features, compatibility changes, improvements, and bug fixes in TiDB 7.1.0.
---

# TiDB 7.1.0 Release Notes

In v7.1.0, the key new features and improvements are as follows:

## Feature details

### Scalability

### Performance

> * 下一代 [`Partitioned Raft KV`](/partitioned-raft-kv.md) 存储引擎 GA [#issue号](链接) @[busyjay](https://github.com/busyjay) @[tonyxuqqi](https://github.com/tonyxuqqi) @[tabokie](https://github.com/tabokie) @[bufferflies](https://github.com/bufferflies) @[5kbpers](https://github.com/5kbpers) @[SpadeA-Tang](https://github.com/SpadeA-Tang) @[nolouch](https://github.com/nolouch) **tw:Oreoxmt**
> 
>     TiDB v6.6.0 引入的全新的 TiKV 存储引擎 [`Partitioned Raft KV`](/partitioned-raft-kv.md) 在 TiDB v7.1.0 版本正式 GA。该引擎使用多个 RocksDB 实例存储 TiKV 的 Region 数据，为每个 Region 提供独立的 RocksDB 实例。此外，该引擎能够更好地管理 RocksDB 实例的文件数和层级，实现 Region 间的数据操作物理隔离，并支持更多数据的平滑扩展。与原 TiKV 存储引擎相比，使用该引擎在相同硬件条件和读写混合场景下，可实现约 2 倍的写入吞吐、3 倍的读取吞吐，并缩短约 4/5 的弹性伸缩时间。该引擎与 TiFlash 引擎兼容，支持 Lightning / BR / TiCDC 等周边工具。该引擎目前仅支持在新集群中使用，暂不支持从原 TiKV 存储引擎直接升级到该引擎。
> 
>     For more information, see [documentation](/partitioned-raft-kv.md).
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/sql-statements/sql-statement-create-index.md#multi-valued-index).

* Improve the partition management for Hash and Key partitioned tables [#42728](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42728) @[mjonss](https://github.com/mjonss) **tw:qiancai**

    Before v7.1.0, Hash and Key partitioned tables in TiDB only support the `TRUNCATE PARTITION` partition management statement. Starting from v7.1.0, Hash and Key partitioned tables also support `ADD PARTITION` and `COALESCE PARTITION` partition management statements. Therefore, you can flexibly adjust the number of partitions in Hash and Key partitioned tables as needed. For example, you can increase the number of partitions with the `ADD PARTITION` statement, or decrease the number of partitions with the `COALESCE PARTITION` statement.

    For more information, see [documentation](/partitioned-table.md#manage-hash-and-key-partitions).

> 

Reviewer 2: 漏掉了这一条：`* Range INTERVAL 分区定义语法功能 GA [#35683](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/35683) @[mjonss](https://github.com/mjonss) **tw:qiancai**`

Reviewer 3: 是的，这条是昨天新加的，稍后会加上英文

    - 支持从 S3、GCS 导入数据
    - 支持导入 Parquet 文件数据
    - 支持解析源文件中 ascii、latin1、binary、gbk、utf8mbd 字符集
    - 支持设置 FIELDS DEFINED NULL BY 将源文件的指定的值转换为 Null 写入目标表。
    - 支持设置一个 bath_size 即 1 个 batch 插入到目标表的行数，提升写入性能。
    - 支持设置 detached，允许该 job 在后台运行。
    - 支持 show load data jobs, show load data jobid, drop load data jobid 来管理任务。

    For more information, see [documentation](https://github.com/pingcap/docs-cn/pull/13344).

* `LOAD DATA` SQL 集成 Lightning local backend（physical import mode） 的导入功能，提升导入性能（实验特性）[#42930](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42930) @[D3Hunter](https://github.com/D3Hunter) **tw:hfxsd**

    用户通过 `LOAD DATA` SQL 导入数据时，可以指定 import_mode = physical 来实现 Lightning local backend （physical 导入模式）的导入效果，相比 Load data 原先的 logical 导入模式，可成倍提升导入数据的性能。

    For more information, see [documentation](链接).

* `LOAD DATA` SQL 支持并行导入，提升导入性能（实验特性）[#40499](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40499) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716) **tw:hfxsd**

    原先 load data sql 无法并行导入数据，性能较差。在该版本中支持设置并行导入的参数，通过提升并发，来提升导入的性能。在实验室环境，相比上个版本，测试逻辑导入性能有接近 4 倍的提升。

    For more information, see [documentation](https://github.com/pingcap/docs-cn/pull/13676).

> * Generated columns become generally available (GA) [#issue号](链接) @[bb7133](https://github.com/bb7133) **tw:ran-huang**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Generated columns become generally available (GA) @[bb7133](https://github.com/bb7133) **tw:ran-huang**
```

> * Generated columns become generally available (GA) [#issue号](链接) @[bb7133](https://github.com/bb7133) **tw:ran-huang**

Reviewer 2: 确认过了没有 issue 号

    Generated columns are a very valuable feature in MySQL. When creating a table, you can define that the value of a column is calculated from the values of other columns in the table, rather than being explicitly inserted or updated by the user. This generated column can be either a virtual column or a stored column. TiDB has provided generated columns compatible with MySQL since earlier versions, and this feature is officially GA in v7.1.0.

>     Using generated columns can improve TiDB's compatibility with MySQL, simplifying the process of migrating from MySQL. It also reduces data maintenance complexity, improves data consistency and query efficiency.

Reviewer 3: avoid TiDB's

    获取充足的信息是 SQL 性能诊断的关键，在 v7.1.0 中，TiDB 持续向各种诊断工具中添加优化器运行信息，可以更好地解释执行计划如何被选择，协助用户和技术支持对 SQL 性能问题进行定位。其中包括：

    * [`PLAN REPLAYER`](/sql-plan-replayer.md#使用-plan-replayer-保存和恢复集群现场信息) 的输出中增加 `debug_trace.json` 文件。
    * [`EXPLAIN`](/explain-walkthrough.md) 的输出中，为 `operator info` 添加部分统计信息详情。
    * 为[`慢日志`](/identify-slow-queries.md)的 `Stats` 字段添加部分统计信息详情。

  更多信息，请参考[使用 `PLAN REPLAYER` 保存和恢复集群线程信息](/sql-plan-replayer.md#使用-plan-replayer-保存和恢复集群现场信息)，[使用 `EXPLAIN` 解读执行计划](/explain-walkthrough.md)和[`慢日志查询`](/identify-slow-queries.md)。

### Security

* Replace the interface used for querying TiFlash system table information [#6941](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6941) @[flowbehappy](https://github.com/flowbehappy) **tw:qiancai**

    Starting from v7.1.0, when providing the query service of [`INFORMATION_SCHEMA.TIFLASH_TABLES`](/information-schema/information-schema-tiflash-tables.md) and [`INFORMATION_SCHEMA.TIFLASH_SEGMENTS`](/information-schema/information-schema-tiflash-segments.md) system tables for TiDB, TiFlash uses the gRPC port instead of the HTTP port, which avoids the security risks of the HTTP service.

### Data migration

> * TiCDC supports the integrity validation feature for single-row data [#8718](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8718) [#42747](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42747) @[3AceShowHand](https://github.com/3AceShowHand) @[zyguan](https://github.com/zyguan) **tw:Oreoxmt**
> 
>     Starting from v7.1.0, TiCDC introduces the data integrity validation feature, which uses a checksum algorithm to validate the integrity of single-row data. This feature helps verify whether any error occurs in the process of writing data from TiDB, replicating it through TiCDC, and then writing it to a Kafka cluster. The data integrity validation feature only supports changefeeds that use Kafka as the downstream and currently supports the Avro protocol.
> 
>     For more information, see [documentation](/ticdc/ticdc-integrity-check.md).
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

* TiCDC Optimizes DDL replication operations [#8686](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8686) @[nongfushanquan](https://github.com/nongfushanquan) **tw:ran-huang**

>     Prior to v7.1.0, when you performed a DDL operation that affected all rows on a large table (such as adding or deleting a column), the replication delay of TiCDC would significantly increase. Starting from v7.1.0, TiCDC optimizes this issue and reduces the replication delay to less than 10 seconds. This optimization mitigates the impact of DDL operations on downstream latency.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Before v7.1.0, when you perform a DDL operation that affected all rows on a large table (such as adding or deleting a column), the replication latency of TiCDC would significantly increase. Starting from v7.1.0, TiCDC optimizes this replication operation and reduces the replication latency to less than 10 seconds. This optimization mitigates the impact of DDL operations on downstream latency.
```

| TiFlash | `http_port` | Deleted | Deprecates the HTTP service port (default `8123`). |
| TiCDC | [`sink.enable-partition-separator`](/ticdc/ticdc-changefeed-config.md#cli-and-configuration-parameters-of-ticdc-changefeeds) | Modified | Changes the default value from `false` to `true` after further tests, meaning that partitions in a table are stored in separate directories by default. It is recommended that you keep the value as `true` to avoid the data loss issue. |

### Others

## Deprecated feature

## Improvements

+ TiDB

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ TiKV

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ PD

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ TiFlash

    - Improve TiFlash performance and stability in the disaggregated storage and compute architecture [#6882](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6882)  @[JaySon-Huang](https://github.com/JaySon-Huang) @[breezewish](https://github.com/breezewish) @[JinheLin](https://github.com/JinheLin) **tw:qiancai**

>     - Support optimizing query performance in Semi Join or Anti Semi Join by selecting the smaller table as the build side of to improve query performance [#7280](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/7280) @[yibin87](https://github.com/yibin87)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Support optimizing query performance in Semi Join or Anti Semi Join by selecting the smaller table as the build side [#7280](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/7280) @[yibin87](https://github.com/yibin87)
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/ddl-introduction.md).

* Backup & Restore supports supports checkpoint restore [#issue](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/issue) @[Leavrth](https://github.com/Leavrth) **tw:Oreoxmt**

    Snapshot restore or log restore might be interrupted due to recoverable errors, such as disk exhaustion and node crash. Before TiDB v7.1.0, the recovery progress before the interruption would be invalidated even after the error is addressed, and you need to start the restore from scratch. For large clusters, this incurs considerable extra cost. Starting from TiDB v7.1.0, Backup & Restore (BR) introduces the checkpoint restore feature, which enables you to continue an interrupted restore. This feature can retain most recovery progress of the interrupted restore.

    For more information, see [documentation](/br/br-checkpoint-restore.md).

> * 统计信息缓存加载策略优化 [#issue](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/issue) @[xuyifangreeneyes](https://github.com/xuyifangreeneyes) **tw:hfxsd**
> 
>     在开启[统计信息同步加载](/statistics.md#统计信息的加载)的前提下，TiDB 大幅减少了启动时必须载入的统计信息的数量，并且在加载完成前不接受用户连接。一方面提升了启动时统计信息的加载速度，另一方面，避免了在启动初始阶段由于统计信息不全而引起的性能回退。提升了 TiDB 在复杂运行环境下的稳定性，降低了个别 TiDB 节点重启对整体服务的影响。
> 
>     For more information, see [documentation]().

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Optimize the policy of loading statistical information cache [#42160](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42160) @[xuyifangreeneyes](https://github.com/xuyifangreeneyes) **tw:hfxsd**

    By enabling [synchronous loading of statistics](/statistics.md#load-statistics), TiDB can significantly reduce the number of statistics that must be loaded upon startup and improves the speed of loading statistics. This feature increases the stability of TiDB in complex runtime environments and reduces the impact of individual TiDB node restart on the overall service.

    For more information, see [documentation](/statistics.md#load-statistics)。
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/partitioned-table.md#manage-hash-and-key-partitions).

* The syntax of Range INTERVAL partitioning becomes generally available (GA) [#35683](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/35683) @[mjonss](https://github.com/mjonss) **tw:qiancai**

    The syntax of Range INTERVAL partitioning (introduced in v6.3.0) becomes GA. With this syntax, you can define partitioning by a desired interval without enumerating all partitions, which drastically reduces the length of Range partitioning DDL statements. The syntax is equivalent to that of the original Range partitioning.

    For more information, see [documentation](/partitioned-table#range-interval-partitioning).

> * `LOAD DATA` SQL 支持从 S3、GCS 导入数据，支持任务管理等功能 GA [#40499](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40499) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716) **tw:hfxsd**
> 
>     以下 `LOAD DATA` 新增的功能在 7.1 版本 GA：
> 
>     - 支持从 S3、GCS 导入数据
>     - 支持导入 Parquet 文件数据
>     - 支持解析源文件中 ascii、latin1、binary、gbk、utf8mbd 字符集
>     - 支持设置 FIELDS DEFINED NULL BY 将源文件的指定的值转换为 Null 写入目标表。
>     - 支持设置一个 bath_size 即 1 个 batch 插入到目标表的行数，提升写入性能。
>     - 支持设置 detached，允许该 job 在后台运行。
>     - 支持 show load data jobs, show load data jobid, drop load data jobid 来管理任务。
> 
>     For more information, see [documentation](https://github.com/pingcap/docs-cn/pull/13344).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
*  `LOAD DATA` supports importing data from S3, and GCS. Some features become GA. [#40499](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40499) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716) **tw:hfxsd**

    The following `LOAD DATA` features become GA in TiDB v7.1.0:

    - Support importing data from SCS, and GCS.
    - Support importing data from Parquet files.
    - Support parsing the following character sets in the source file: `ascii`, `latin1`, `binary`, `gbk`, `utf8mbd`. 
    - Support setting `FIELDS DEFINED NULL BY` to convert the specified value of the source file to `NULL` for writing to the target table.
    - Support setting 1 `bath_size` which is the number of rows inserted into the target table by 1 batch to improve write performance.
    - Support setting `detached` to allow the job to run in the background.
    - Support using `SHOW LOAD DATA` and `DROP LOAD DATA` to manage jobs.

    For more information, see [documentation](/sql-statements/sql-statement-load-data.md).
```

> * `LOAD DATA` SQL 集成 Lightning local backend（physical import mode） 的导入功能，提升导入性能（实验特性）[#42930](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42930) @[D3Hunter](https://github.com/D3Hunter) **tw:hfxsd**
> 
>     用户通过 `LOAD DATA` SQL 导入数据时，可以指定 import_mode = physical 来实现 Lightning local backend （physical 导入模式）的导入效果，相比 Load data 原先的 logical 导入模式，可成倍提升导入数据的性能。
> 
>     For more information, see [documentation](链接).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* `LOAD DATA` integrates with TiDB Lightning Physical Import Mode to improve import performance (experimental) [#42930](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42930) @[D3Hunter](https://github.com/D3Hunter) **tw:hfxsd**

    `LOAD DATA` integrates with TiDB lightning Physical Import Mode. You can enable it by setting `WITH import_mode = 'PHYSICAL'`. This feature can improve the performance of importing data exponentially compared to Logical Import Mode.

    For more information, see [documentation](/sql-statements/sql-statement-load-data.md).
```

> * `LOAD DATA` SQL 支持并行导入，提升导入性能（实验特性）[#40499](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40499) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716) **tw:hfxsd**
> 
>     原先 load data sql 无法并行导入数据，性能较差。在该版本中支持设置并行导入的参数，通过提升并发，来提升导入的性能。在实验室环境，相比上个版本，测试逻辑导入性能有接近 4 倍的提升。
> 
>     For more information, see [documentation](https://github.com/pingcap/docs-cn/pull/13676).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* `LOAD DATA` supports import concurrency to improve import performance (experimental) [#40499](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40499) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716) **tw:hfxsd**

    Previously, `LOAD DATA` did not support concurrent data import, so the performance was poor. In TiDB v7.1.0, you can set the parameter `WITH thread=<number>` for concurrent import, which can improve the performance of import by increasing concurrency. In the lab environment, the performance of test logic import is nearly 4 times better than the previous version

    For more information, see [documentation](/sql-statements/sql-statement-load-data.md).
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/generated-columns.md).

### DB operations

* DDL tasks support pause and resume operations (experimental) [#18015](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/18015) @[godouxm](https://github.com/godouxm) **tw:ran-huang**

    Before TiDB v7.1.0, when a DDL task encounters a business peak period during execution, you can only manually cancel the DDL task to reduce its impact on the business. In v7.1.0, TiDB introduces pause and resume operations for DDL tasks. These operations let you pause DDL tasks during peak periods and resume them after the peak ends, thus avoiding any impact on your application workloads.

    For example, you can pause and resume multiple DDL tasks using [`ADMIN PAUSE DDL JOBS`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-admin-pause-ddl.md) or [`ADMIN RESUME DDL JOBS`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-admin-resume-ddl.md):

    ```sql
    ADMIN PAUSE DDL JOBS 1,2;
    ADMIN RESUME DDL JOBS 1,2;
    ```

    For more information, see [`ADMIN PAUSE DDL JOBS`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-admin-pause-ddl.md) and [`ADMIN RESUME DDL JOBS`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-admin-resume-ddl.md).

### Observability

> * 增加优化器诊断信息 [#issue号](链接) @[time-and-fate](https://github.com/time-and-fate) **tw:hfxsd**
> 
>     获取充足的信息是 SQL 性能诊断的关键，在 v7.1.0 中，TiDB 持续向各种诊断工具中添加优化器运行信息，可以更好地解释执行计划如何被选择，协助用户和技术支持对 SQL 性能问题进行定位。其中包括：
> 
>     * [`PLAN REPLAYER`](/sql-plan-replayer.md#使用-plan-replayer-保存和恢复集群现场信息) 的输出中增加 `debug_trace.json` 文件。
>     * [`EXPLAIN`](/explain-walkthrough.md) 的输出中，为 `operator info` 添加部分统计信息详情。
>     * 为[`慢日志`](/identify-slow-queries.md)的 `Stats` 字段添加部分统计信息详情。
> 
>   更多信息，请参考[使用 `PLAN REPLAYER` 保存和恢复集群线程信息](/sql-plan-replayer.md#使用-plan-replayer-保存和恢复集群现场信息)，[使用 `EXPLAIN` 解读执行计划](/explain-walkthrough.md)和[`慢日志查询`](/identify-slow-queries.md)。

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* 增加优化器诊断信息 [#43122](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/43122) @[time-and-fate](https://github.com/time-and-fate) **tw:hfxsd**

    Having sufficient information is key to SQL performance diagnostics. In v7.1.0, TiDB continues to add optimizer operation information to various diagnostic tools that can better explain how execution plans are selected. Such information can assist in troubleshooting SQL performance issues. The information includes:

    * The output of [`PLAN REPLAYER`](/sql-plan-replayer.md) adds `debug_trace.json`.
    * The output of [`EXPLAIN`](/explain-walkthrough.md) adds partial details of the statistics for `operator info`.
    * Add partial statistics details to the `Stats` field of [`slow-queries`](/identify-slow-queries.md).

  For more information, see [Use PLAN REPLAYER to Save and Restore the On-Site Information of a Cluster](/sql-plan-replayer.md)，[EXPLAIN Walkthrough](/explain-walkthrough.md) and [Identify Slow Queries](/identify-slow-queries.md).

```

## Compatibility changes

> **Note:**
>
> This section provides compatibility changes you need to know when you upgrade from v7.0.0 to the current version (v7.1.0). If you are upgrading from v6.6.0 or earlier versions to the current version, you might also need to check the compatibility changes introduced in intermediate versions.

### MySQL compatibility

### Behavior changes

* To improve security, TiFlash deprecates the HTTP service port (default `8123`) and uses the gRPC port as a replacement **tw:qiancai**

    If you have upgraded TiFlash to v7.1.0, then during the TiDB upgrade to v7.1.0, TiDB cannot read the TiFlash system tables ([`INFORMATION_SCHEMA.TIFLASH_TABLES`](/information-schema/information- schema-tiflash-tables.md) and [`INFORMATION_SCHEMA.TIFLASH_SEGMENTS`](/information-schema/information-schema-tiflash-segments.md)).

> * [`SHOW LOAD DATA`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-show-load-data.md) 的返回值中废弃了参数 `Loaded_File_Size`，替换为参数 `Imported_Rows` **tw:hfxsd**

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* The parameter `Loaded_File_Size` is deprecated in the return value of [`SHOW LOAD DATA`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-show-load-data.md) and replaced with the parameter `Imported_Rows`. **tw:hfxsd**
```

---
title: TiDB 7.1.0 Release Notes
summary: Learn about the new features, compatibility changes, improvements, and bug fixes in TiDB 7.1.0.
---

# TiDB 7.1.0 Release Notes

TiDB version: 7.1.0-[DMR](/releases/versioning.md#development-milestone-releases)

Quick access: [Quick start](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v7.0/quick-start-with-tidb) | [Installation package](https://www.pingcap.com/download/?version=v7.0.0#version-list)

In v7.1.0-LTS, the key new features and improvements are as follows:

## Feature details

### Scalability

> * TiFlash 支持存算分离和对象存储 (GA) [#6882](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6882) @[flowbehappy](https://github.com/flowbehappy) @[JaySon-Huang](https://github.com/JaySon-Huang) @[breezewish](https://github.com/breezewish) @[JinheLin](https://github.com/JinheLin) @[lidezhu](https://github.com/lidezhu) @[CalvinNeo](https://github.com/CalvinNeo) **tw:qiancai**
> 
>     在 v7.0.0 版本中，TiFlash 在已有的存算一体架构之外，新增存算分离架构。在此架构下，TiFlash 节点分为 Compute Node（计算节点）和 Write Node（写入节点）两种类型，并支持兼容 S3 API 的对象存储。这两种节点都可以单独扩缩容，独立调整计算或数据存储能力。
> 
>     从 v7.1.0 版本开始，TiFlash 存算分离架构正式 GA。TiFlash 的存算分离架构和存算一体架构不能混合使用、相互转换，需要在部署 TiFlash 时进行相应的配置指定使用其中的一种架构。
> 
>     更多信息，请参考[用户文档](/tiflash/tiflash-disaggregated-and-s3.md)。

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

>      In v7.0.0, TiFlash supports late materialization as an experiment feature for optimizing query performance. This feature is disabled by default (the [`tidb_opt_enable_late_materialization`](/system-variables.md#tidb_opt_enable_late_materialization-new-in-v700) system variable defaults to `OFF`). when processing a `SELECT` statement with filter conditions (`WHERE` clause), TiFlash reads all the data from the columns required by the query, and then filters and aggregates the data based on the query conditions. When Late materialization is enabled, TiDB supports pushing down part of the filter conditions to the TableScan operator. That is, TiFlash first scans the column data related to the filter conditions that are pushed down to the TableScan operator, filters the rows that meet the condition, and then scans the other column data of these rows for further calculation, thereby reducing IO scans and computations of data processing.

Author: @qiancai PTAL

    For more information, see [documentation](/troubleshoot-hot-spot-issues.md#scatter-read-hotspots).

* Support caching execution plans for non-prepared statements (GA) [#36598](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/36598) @[qw4990](https://github.com/qw4990) **tw:Oreoxmt**

    TiDB v7.0.0 introduces non-prepared plan cache as an experimental feature to improve the load capacity of concurrent OLTP. In v7.1.0, this feature is generally available, enabled by default, and supports caching more SQL statements.

    To improve memory utilization, TiDB v7.1.0 merges the cache pools of non-prepared and prepared plan caches. You can control the cache size using the system variable [`tidb_session_plan_cache_size`](/system-variables.md#tidb_session_plan_cache_size-new-in-v710). The [`tidb_prepared_plan_cache_size`](/system-variables.md#tidb_prepared_plan_cache_size-new-in-v610) and [`tidb_non_prepared_plan_cache_size`](/system-variables.md#tidb_non_prepared_plan_cache_size) system variables are deprecated.

>     To maintain forward compatibility, when you upgrade from an earlier version to a v7.1.0 or later cluster, the cache size `tidb_session_plan_cache_size` remains the same value as `tidb_prepared_plan_cache_size`, and [`tidb_enable_non_prepared_plan_cache`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_non_prepared_plan_cache) remains the setting before the upgrade. After sufficient performance testing, you can enable non-prepared plan cache using `tidb_enable_non_prepared_plan_cache`. For a newly created cluster, non-prepared plan cache is enabled by default.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    To maintain forward compatibility, when you upgrade from an earlier version to v7.1.0 or later versions, the cache size `tidb_session_plan_cache_size` remains the same value as `tidb_prepared_plan_cache_size`, and [`tidb_enable_non_prepared_plan_cache`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_non_prepared_plan_cache) remains the setting before the upgrade. After sufficient performance testing, you can enable non-prepared plan cache using `tidb_enable_non_prepared_plan_cache`. For a newly created cluster, non-prepared plan cache is enabled by default.
```

    With this feature, you can combine multiple small and medium-sized applications from different systems into a single TiDB cluster. When the workload of an application grows larger, it does not affect the normal operation of other applications. When the system workload is low, busy applications can still be allocated the required system resources even if they exceed the set read and write quotas, which can achieve the maximum utilization of resources. In addition, the rational use of the resource control feature can reduce the number of clusters, ease the difficulty of operation and maintenance, and save management costs.

>     In TiDB v7.1.0, this feature adds the ability to estimate system capacity caps based on actual workload and hardware deployment. The estimation ability provides you with a more accurate reference for capacity planning and assists you in better managing TiDB resource allocation to meet the stability needs of enterprise-class scenarios.    

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    In TiDB v7.1.0, this feature adds the ability to estimate system capacity based on actual workload and hardware deployment. The estimation ability provides you with a more accurate reference for capacity planning and assists you in better managing TiDB resource allocation to meet the stability needs of enterprise-class scenarios.    
```

> * Resource Control GA [#38825](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38825) @[nolouch](https://github.com/nolouch) @[BornChanger](https://github.com/BornChanger) @[glorv](https://github.com/glorv) @[tiancaiamao](https://github.com/tiancaiamao) @[Connor1996](https://github.com/Connor1996) @[JmPotato](https://github.com/JmPotato) @[hnes](https://github.com/hnes) @[CabinfeverB](https://github.com/CabinfeverB) @[HuSharp](https://github.com/HuSharp) **tw:hfxsd**
> 
>     TiDB enhances the resource control feature based on resource groups. This feature becomes GA in v7.1.0. This feature significantly improves the resource utilization efficiency and performance of TiDB clusters. The introduction of the resource control feature is a milestone for TiDB. You can divide a distributed database cluster into multiple logical units, map different database users to corresponding resource groups, and set the quota for each resource group as needed. When the cluster resources are limited, all resources used by sessions in the same resource group are limited to the quota. In this way, even if a resource group is over-consumed, the sessions in other resource groups are not affected. 
> 
>     With this feature, you can combine multiple small and medium-sized applications from different systems into a single TiDB cluster. When the workload of an application grows larger, it does not affect the normal operation of other applications. When the system workload is low, busy applications can still be allocated the required system resources even if they exceed the set read and write quotas, which can achieve the maximum utilization of resources. In addition, the rational use of the resource control feature can reduce the number of clusters, ease the difficulty of operation and maintenance, and save management costs.
> 
>     In TiDB v7.1.0, this feature adds the ability to estimate system capacity based on actual workload and hardware deployment. The estimation ability provides you with a more accurate reference for capacity planning and assists you in better managing TiDB resource allocation to meet the stability needs of enterprise-class scenarios.    
> 
>     For more information, see [documentation](/tidb-resource-control.md).

Author: ```suggestion
* Resource Control becomes generally available (GA) [#38825](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38825) @[nolouch](https://github.com/nolouch) @[BornChanger](https://github.com/BornChanger) @[glorv](https://github.com/glorv) @[tiancaiamao](https://github.com/tiancaiamao) @[Connor1996](https://github.com/Connor1996) @[JmPotato](https://github.com/JmPotato) @[hnes](https://github.com/hnes) @[CabinfeverB](https://github.com/CabinfeverB) @[HuSharp](https://github.com/HuSharp) **tw:hfxsd**

    TiDB enhances the resource control feature based on resource groups, which becomes GA in v7.1.0. This feature significantly improves the resource utilization efficiency and performance of TiDB clusters. The introduction of the resource control feature is a milestone for TiDB. You can divide a distributed database cluster into multiple logical units, map different database users to corresponding resource groups, and set the quota for each resource group as needed. When the cluster resources are limited, all resources used by sessions in the same resource group are limited to the quota. In this way, even if a resource group is over-consumed, the sessions in other resource groups are not affected. 

    With this feature, you can combine multiple small and medium-sized applications from different systems into a single TiDB cluster. When the workload of an application grows larger, it does not affect the normal operation of other applications. When the system workload is low, busy applications can still be allocated the required system resources even if they exceed the set read and write quotas, which can achieve the maximum utilization of resources. In addition, the rational use of the resource control feature can reduce the number of clusters, ease the difficulty of operation and maintenance, and save management costs.

    In TiDB v7.1.0, this feature introduces the ability to estimate system capacity based on actual workload or hardware deployment. The estimation ability provides you with a more accurate reference for capacity planning and assists you in better managing TiDB resource allocation to meet the stability needs of enterprise-level scenarios.    

    For more information, see [documentation](/tidb-resource-control.md).
```

* Support the checkpoint mechanism for [Fast Online DDL](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg-new-in-v630) to improve fault tolerance and automatic recovery capability [#42164](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42164) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta) **tw:ran-huang**

    TiDB v7.1.0 introduces a checkpoint mechanism for [Fast Online DDL](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg-new-in-v630), which significantly improves the fault tolerance and automatic recovery capability of Fast Online DDL. Even in the case of TiDB DDL owner switching, TiDB can still periodically record and synchronize the progress of DDL statements, allowing the new TiDB DDL owner to execute the ongoing DDL statements in Fast Online DDL mode without manually canceling and re-executing the statements. The checkpoint mechanism makes the DDL execution more stable and efficient.

    For more information, see [documentation](/ddl-introduction.md).

> * Backup & Restore supports supports checkpoint restore [#issue](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/issue) @[Leavrth](https://github.com/Leavrth) **tw:Oreoxmt**

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Backup & Restore supports checkpoint restore [#issue](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/issue) @[Leavrth](https://github.com/Leavrth) **tw:Oreoxmt**
```

    Snapshot restore or log restore might be interrupted due to recoverable errors, such as disk exhaustion and node crash. Before TiDB v7.1.0, the recovery progress before the interruption would be invalidated even after the error is addressed, and you need to start the restore from scratch. For large clusters, this incurs considerable extra cost. Starting from TiDB v7.1.0, Backup & Restore (BR) introduces the checkpoint restore feature, which enables you to continue an interrupted restore. This feature can retain most recovery progress of the interrupted restore.

    For more information, see [documentation](/br/br-checkpoint-restore.md).

> * Optimize the policy of loading statistical information cache [#42160](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42160) @[xuyifangreeneyes](https://github.com/xuyifangreeneyes) **tw:hfxsd**
> 
>     By enabling [synchronous loading of statistics](/statistics.md#load-statistics), you can significantly reduce the number of statistics that must be loaded upon startup and improve the speed of loading statistics. This feature increases the stability of TiDB in complex runtime environments and reduces the impact of individual TiDB node restart on the overall service.
> 
>     For more information, see [documentation](/statistics.md#load-statistics)。

Author: ```suggestion
* Optimize the strategy of loading statistics [#42160](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42160) @[xuyifangreeneyes](https://github.com/xuyifangreeneyes) **tw:hfxsd**

    Enabling synchronous loading of statistics can significantly reduce the number of statistics that must be loaded during startup, thus improving the speed of loading statistics. This feature increases the stability of TiDB in complex runtime environments and reduces the impact of individual TiDB nodes restart on the overall service.

    For more information, see [documentation](/statistics.md#load-statistics).
```

    - Support parsing the following character sets in the source file: `ascii`, `latin1`, `binary`, `gbk`, `utf8mbd`. 
    - Support setting `FIELDS DEFINED NULL BY` to convert the specified value of the source file to `NULL` for writing to the target table.
    - Support setting 1 `bath_size` which is the number of rows inserted into the target table by 1 batch to improve write performance.
    - Support setting `detached` to allow the job to run in the background.
    - Support using `SHOW LOAD DATA` and `DROP LOAD DATA` to manage jobs.

    For more information, see [documentation](/sql-statements/sql-statement-load-data.md).

* `LOAD DATA` integrates with TiDB Lightning Physical Import Mode to improve import performance (experimental) [#42930](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42930) @[D3Hunter](https://github.com/D3Hunter) **tw:hfxsd**

    `LOAD DATA` integrates with TiDB Lightning Physical Import Mode. You can enable it by setting `WITH import_mode = 'PHYSICAL'`. This feature can improve the performance of importing data exponentially compared to Logical Import Mode.

    For more information, see [documentation](/sql-statements/sql-statement-load-data.md).

> * `LOAD DATA` supports import concurrency to improve import performance (experimental) [#40499](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40499) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716) **tw:hfxsd**

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* `LOAD DATA` supports concurrent data import to improve import performance (experimental) [#40499](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40499) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716) **tw:hfxsd**
```

>     Previously, `LOAD DATA` did not support concurrent data import, so the performance was not as good as expected. In TiDB v7.1.0, you can set the parameter `WITH thread=<number>` for concurrent import, which can improve the performance of import by increasing concurrency. In the lab environment, the performance of test logic import is nearly 4 times better than the previous version.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    Previously, `LOAD DATA` did not support concurrent data import, so the performance was not as good as expected. In TiDB v7.1.0, you can set the parameter `WITH thread=<number>` for concurrent import, which can improve the performance of import by increasing concurrency. In the lab environment, the import performance is nearly 4 times better than the previous version.
```

>     Previously, `LOAD DATA` did not support concurrent data import, so the performance was not as good as expected. In TiDB v7.1.0, you can set the parameter `WITH thread=<number>` for concurrent import, which can improve the performance of import by increasing concurrency. In the lab environment, the logical import performance of the test workload is nearly 4 times better than the previous version.

Author: ```suggestion
    Before v7.1.0, `LOAD DATA` does not support concurrent data import, which limits its performance. Starting from TiDB v7.1.0, `LOAD DATA` supports concurrent data import. To enhance import performance, you can increase the concurrency using `WITH thread=<number>`. In internal tests, the logical import performance of the test workload is nearly four times better than that in v7.0.0.
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/generated-columns.md).

### DB operations

* DDL tasks support pause and resume operations (experimental) [#18015](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/18015) @[godouxm](https://github.com/godouxm) **tw:ran-huang**

    Before TiDB v7.1.0, when a DDL task encounters a business peak period during execution, you can only manually cancel the DDL task to reduce its impact on the business. In v7.1.0, TiDB introduces pause and resume operations for DDL tasks. These operations let you pause DDL tasks during peak periods and resume them after the peak ends, thus avoiding any impact on your application workloads.

    For example, you can pause and resume multiple DDL tasks using [`ADMIN PAUSE DDL JOBS`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-admin-pause-ddl.md) or [`ADMIN RESUME DDL JOBS`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-admin-resume-ddl.md):

    ```sql
    ADMIN PAUSE DDL JOBS 1,2;
    ADMIN RESUME DDL JOBS 1,2;
    ```

    For more information, see [`ADMIN PAUSE DDL JOBS`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-admin-pause-ddl.md) and [`ADMIN RESUME DDL JOBS`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-admin-resume-ddl.md).

### Observability

> * Add optimizer diagnostics information [#43122](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/43122) @[time-and-fate](https://github.com/time-and-fate) **tw:hfxsd**
> 
>     Having sufficient information is key to SQL performance diagnostics. In v7.1.0, TiDB continues to add optimizer operation information to various diagnostic tools that can better explain how execution plans are selected. Such information can assist in troubleshooting SQL performance issues. The information includes:
> 
>     * In the output of [`PLAN REPLAYER`](/sql-plan-replayer.md), add `debug_trace.json`.
>     * In the output of [`EXPLAIN`](/explain-walkthrough.md), add partial details of the statistics for `operator info`.
>     * In the `Stats` field of [`slow-queries`](/identify-slow-queries.md), add partial statistics details.
> 
>   For more information, see [Use PLAN REPLAYER to Save and Restore the On-Site Information of a Cluster](/sql-plan-replayer.md), [EXPLAIN Walkthrough](/explain-walkthrough.md) and [Identify Slow Queries](/identify-slow-queries.md).

Author: ```suggestion
* Enhance optimizer diagnostic information [#43122](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/43122) @[time-and-fate](https://github.com/time-and-fate) **tw:hfxsd**

    Obtaining sufficient information is the key to SQL performance diagnostics. In v7.1.0, TiDB continues to add optimizer runtime information to various diagnostic tools, providing better insights into how execution plans are selected and assisting in troubleshooting SQL performance issues. The new information includes:

    * `debug_trace.json` in the output of [`PLAN REPLAYER`](/sql-plan-replayer.md).
    * Partial statistics details for `operator info` in the output of [`EXPLAIN`](/explain-walkthrough.md).
    * Partial statistics details in the `Stats` field of [`slow-queries`](/identify-slow-queries.md).

  For more information, see [Use `PLAN REPLAYER` to save and restore the on-site information of a cluster](/sql-plan-replayer.md), [`EXPLAIN` walkthrough](/explain-walkthrough.md), and [Identify slow queries](/identify-slow-queries.md).
```

> 
> 

Author: ```suggestion

```

### System variables

| Variable name  | Change type    | Description |
|--------|------------------------------|------|
|        |                              |      |
|        |                              |      |
|        |                              |      |
|        |                              |      |

### Configuration file parameters

| Configuration file | Configuration parameter | Change type | Description |
| -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- |
| TiFlash | `http_port` | 删除 | 废弃 TiFlash HTTP 服务端口（默认 `8123`）。|
|          |          |          |          |
|          |          |          |          |
|          |          |          |          |

### Others

## Deprecated feature

## Improvements

+ TiDB

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ TiKV

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ PD

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ TiFlash

>     - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - 提升 TiFlash 在存算分离架构下的性能和稳定性 [#6882](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6882)  @[JaySon-Huang](https://github.com/JaySon-Huang) @[breezewish](https://github.com/breezewish) @[JinheLin](https://github.com/JinheLin) **tw:qiancai**
```

> * In the return value of [`SHOW LOAD DATA`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-show-load-data.md), the parameter `Loaded_File_Size` is deprecated and replaced with the parameter `Imported_Rows` **tw:hfxsd**

Author: ```suggestion
* In the outputs of [`SHOW LOAD DATA`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-show-load-data.md), the `Loaded_File_Size` parameter is deprecated and replaced with the `Imported_Rows` parameter. **tw:hfxsd**
```

>     - Improves TiFlash performance and stability in the disaggregated storage and compute architecture [#6882](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6882)  @[JaySon-Huang](https://github.com/JaySon-Huang) @[breezewish](https://github.com/breezewish) @[JinheLin](https://github.com/JinheLin) **tw:qiancai**
>     - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

Author: ```suggestion
    - Improve TiFlash performance and stability in the disaggregated storage and compute architecture [#6882](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6882)  @[JaySon-Huang](https://github.com/JaySon-Huang) @[breezewish](https://github.com/breezewish) @[JinheLin](https://github.com/JinheLin) **tw:qiancai**
    - Support optimizing query performance in Semi Join or Anti Semi Join by selecting the smaller table as the build side of to improve query performance [#7280](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/7280) @[yibin87](https://github.com/yibin87)
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/generated-columns.md).

### DB operations

* DDL tasks support pause and resume operations [#issue number](link) @[godouxm](https://github.com/godouxm) **tw:ran-huang**

    Prior to TiDB v7.1.0, when a DDL task encountered a business peak period during execution, you could only manually cancel the DDL task to reduce its impact on the business. To mitigate the impact of DDL operations on application workloads, in v7.1.0, TiDB introduces pause and resume operations for DDL tasks. These operations let you pause DDL tasks during peak periods and resume them after the peak ends, thus avoiding any impact on your business.

    For example, you can pause and resume multiple DDL tasks using [`ADMIN PAUSE DDL JOBS`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-admin-pause-ddl.md) or [`ADMIN RESUME DDL JOBS`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-admin-resume-ddl.md):

    ```sql
    ADMIN PAUSE ddl jobs 1,2;
    ADMIN RESUME ddl jobs 1,2;
    ```

    For more information, see [`ADMIN PAUSE DDL JOBS`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-admin-pause-ddl.md) and [`ADMIN RESUME DDL JOBS`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-admin-resume-ddl.md).

> * Support smooth cluster upgrade without canceling DDL operations [#issue number](link) @[zimulala](https://github.com/zimulala) @[hawkingrei](https://github.com/hawkingrei)
> 
>     Before TiDB v7.1.0, to upgrade a cluster, you must manually cancel the running or queued DDL tasks and then add them back after the upgrade is completed. 
> 
>     To offer a smoother upgrade experience, TiDB v7.1.0 introduces automatic pausing and resuming of DDL tasks. Starting from v7.1.0, you can upgrade your clusters without manually canceling DDL tasks. TiDB will automatically pause any running or queued DDL tasks before the upgrade and resume these tasks after the cluster has completed rolling upgrade, making it easier for you to upgrade your TiDB clusters.
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

    更多信息，请参考[用户文档](https://github.com/pingcap/docs-cn/pull/13344)。

* `LOAD DATA` SQL 集成 Lightning local backend（physical import mode） 的导入功能，提升导入性能（实验特性）[#42930](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42930) @[D3Hunter](https://github.com/D3Hunter) **tw:hfxsd**

    用户通过 `LOAD DATA` SQL 导入数据时，可以指定 import_mode = physical 来实现 Lightning local backend （physical 导入模式）的导入效果，相比 Load data 原先的 logical 导入模式，可成倍提升导入数据的性能。

    更多信息，请参考[用户文档](链接)。

* `LOAD DATA` SQL 支持并行导入，提升导入性能（实验特性）[#40499](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40499) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716) **tw:hfxsd**

    原先 load data sql 无法并行导入数据，性能较差。在该版本中支持设置并行导入的参数，通过提升并发，来提升导入的性能。在实验室环境，相比上个版本，测试逻辑导入性能有接近 4 倍的提升。

    更多信息，请参考[用户文档](https://github.com/pingcap/docs-cn/pull/13676)。

* 生成列 (Generated Columns) GA [#issue号](链接) @[bb7133](https://github.com/bb7133) **tw:ran-huang**

    生成列 (Generated Columns) 是 MySQL 数据库很有价值的一个功能。在创建表时定义一列的值由表中其他列的值计算而来，而不是由用户显式插入或更新，它可以是虚拟列 (Virtual Column) 或存储列(Stored Column)。TiDB 在早期版本就提供了 MySQL 兼容的生成列，在 v7.1.0 中将这个功能 GA。

    生成列提升了 TiDB 对 MySQL 的兼容性，方便用户从 MySQL 平滑迁移，同时也简化数据维护的复杂度、增强数据的一致性、提高查询效率。

    更多信息，请参考[用户文档](/generated-columns.md)。

### DB operations

> * DDL 任务支持暂停和恢复操作 [#issue号](链接) @[godouxm](https://github.com/godouxm) **tw:ran-huang**
> 
>     TiDB v7.1.0 之前的版本中，当 DDL 任务执行期间遇到业务高峰时间点时，为了减少对业务的影响，用户只能手动取消 DDL 任务。为了减轻 DDL 操作对业务负载的影响，TiDB v7.1.0 引入了 DDL 任务的暂停和恢复操作，用户可以在高峰时间点暂停 DDL 任务，等到业务高峰时间结束后再恢复 DDL 任务，从而避免了对业务的影响。
> 
>     例如，可以通过如下 [`ADMIN PAUSE DDL JOBS`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-admin-pause-ddl.md) 或 [`ADMIN RESUME DDL JOBS`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-admin-resume-ddl.md) 子句暂停或者恢复多个 DDL 任务：
> 
>     ```sql
>     SQL> admin pause ddl jobs 1,2;
> 
>     SQL> admin resume ddl jobs 1,2;
>     ```
> 
>     更多信息，请参考 [`ADMIN PAUSE DDL JOBS`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-admin-pause-ddl.md) 和 [`ADMIN RESUME DDL JOBS`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-admin-resume-ddl.md)。

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* DDL tasks support pause and resume operations [#issue number](link) @[godouxm](https://github.com/godouxm) **tw:ran-huang**

    Prior to TiDB v7.1.0, when a DDL task encountered a business peak period during execution, you could only manually cancel the DDL task to reduce its impact on the business. To mitigate the impact of DDL operations on application workloads, in v7.1.0, TiDB introduces pause and resume operations for DDL tasks. These operations let you pause DDL tasks during peak periods and resume them after the peak ends, thus avoiding any impact on your business.

    For example, you can pause and resume multiple DDL tasks using [`ADMIN PAUSE DDL JOBS`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-admin-pause-ddl.md) or [`ADMIN RESUME DDL JOBS`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-admin-resume-ddl.md):

    ```sql
    ADMIN PAUSE ddl jobs 1,2;
    ADMIN RESUME ddl jobs 1,2;
    ```

    For more information, see [`ADMIN PAUSE DDL JOBS`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-admin-pause-ddl.md) and [`ADMIN RESUME DDL JOBS`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-admin-resume-ddl.md).
```

> * 无需取消 DDL 的平滑集群升级功能 [#issue号](链接) @[zimulala](https://github.com/zimulala) @[hawkingrei](https://github.com/hawkingrei) **tw:ran-huang**
> 
>     TiDB v7.1.0 之前的版本在升级集群时需要先手动取消正在运行或排队的 DDL 任务，在升级完毕后再手动添加这些任务。为了让用户享受更加平滑的升级体验，TiDB v7.1.0 引入了自动暂停和恢复 DDL 任务的功能。从 v7.1.0 版本开始，用户可以在不需要手动取消 DDL 任务的情况下升级集群。系统会自动暂停正在执行或排队的 DDL 任务，等待整个集群完成滚动升级后再自动恢复这些任务，让用户可以更加轻松地升级 TiDB 集群。

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Support smooth cluster upgrade without canceling DDL operations [#issue number](link) @[zimulala](https://github.com/zimulala) @[hawkingrei](https://github.com/hawkingrei)

    Before TiDB v7.1.0, to upgrade a cluster, you must manually cancel the running or queued DDL tasks and then add them back after the upgrade is completed. 

    To offer a smoother upgrade experience, TiDB v7.1.0 introduces automatic pausing and resuming of DDL tasks. Starting from v7.1.0, you can upgrade your clusters without manually canceling DDL tasks. TiDB will automatically pause any running or queued DDL tasks before the upgrade and resume these tasks after the cluster has completed rolling upgrade, making it easier for you to upgrade your TiDB clusters.
```

    * [`EXPLAIN`](/explain-walkthrough.md) 的输出中，为 `operator info` 添加部分统计信息详情。
    * 为[`慢日志`](/identify-slow-queries.md)的 `Stats` 字段添加部分统计信息详情。

  更多信息，请参考[使用 `PLAN REPLAYER` 保存和恢复集群线程信息](/sql-plan-replayer.md#使用-plan-replayer-保存和恢复集群现场信息)，[使用 `EXPLAIN` 解读执行计划](/explain-walkthrough.md)和[`慢日志查询`](/identify-slow-queries.md)。

### 安全

* 更换 TiFlash 系统表信息的查询接口 [#6941](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6941) @[flowbehappy](https://github.com/flowbehappy) **tw:qiancai**

    从 v7.1.0 起，TiFlash 在向 TiDB 提供 [`INFORMATION_SCHEMA.TIFLASH_TABLES`](/information-schema/information-schema-tiflash-tables.md) 和 [`INFORMATION_SCHEMA.TIFLASH_SEGMENTS`](/information-schema/information-schema-tiflash-segments.md) 系统表查询服务的端口时，不再使用 HTTP 端口，而是使用 gRPC 端口，从而避免 HTTP 服务的安全风险。

### 数据迁移

* TiCDC 支持 E2E 单行数据正确性校验功能 [#issue号](链接) @[3AceShowHand](https://github.com/3AceShowHand) @[zyguan](https://github.com/zyguan) **tw:Oreoxmt**

    从 v7.1.0 版本开始，TiCDC 新增了单行数据正确性校验功能，该功能基于 Checksum 算法对单行数据的正确性进行校验。通过该功能可以校验一行数据从 TiDB 写入、经由 TiCDC 流出，再写入到 Kafka 集群的过程中是否发生了数据错误。该功能仅支持下游是 Kafka Sink 的 Changefeed，支持 Canal-JSON / Avro / Open-Protocol 等协议。

    更多信息，请参考[用户文档](/ticdc/ticdc-integrity-check.md)。

> * TiCDC 优化 DDL 同步操作 [#8686](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8686) @[nongfushanquan](https://github.com/nongfushanquan) **tw:ran-huang**
> 
>    在 v7.1.0 版本之前，当用户在一个大表上运行需要影响所有行的 DDL 操作，例如添加 / 删除列时，TiCDC 的同步延迟会显著增加。从 v7.1.0 版本开始，TiCDC 对于这种情况进行了优化，将同步延迟降低到不到 10 秒，以减轻 DDL 操作对下游延迟的影响。
> 
>     更多信息，请参考[用户文档](链接)。

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* TiCDC Optimizes DDL replication operations [#8686](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8686) @[nongfushanquan](https://github.com/nongfushanquan)

    Prior to v7.1.0, when you performed a DDL operation that affected all rows on a large table (such as adding or deleting a column), the replication delay of TiCDC would significantly increase. Starting from v7.1.0, TiCDC optimizes this issue and reduces the replication delay to less than 10 seconds. This optimization mitigates the impact of DDL operations on downstream latency.
```

    更多信息，请参考[用户文档](/ddl-introduction.md)。

* BR 备份恢复工具支持断点恢复 [#issue](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/issue) @[Leavrth](https://github.com/Leavrth) **tw:Oreoxmt**

    如果用户的 TiDB 集群规模较大，之前在进行数据库的快照恢复或日志恢复时，可能会出现一些意外情况导致恢复过程提前结束，例如硬盘空间占满、节点宕机等等。在 TiDB v7.1.0 之前的版本中，这些意外情况会导致之前恢复的进度作废，需要重新进行恢复，给用户带来大量额外成本和麻烦。

    为了解决这个问题，TiDB v7.1.0 引入了备份恢复的断点恢复功能。该功能可以在意外中断后保留上一次恢复的大部分进度，使得用户能够尽可能地继续上一次的恢复的进度，避免不必要的成本和麻烦。

    更多信息，请参考[用户文档](/br/br-checkpoint-restore.md)。

* 统计信息缓存加载策略优化 [#issue](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/issue) @[xuyifangreeneyes](https://github.com/xuyifangreeneyes) **tw:hfxsd**

    在开启[统计信息同步加载](/statistics.md#统计信息的加载)的前提下，TiDB 大幅减少了启动时必须载入的统计信息的数量，并且在加载完成前不接受用户连接。一方面提升了启动时统计信息的加载速度，另一方面，避免了在启动初始阶段由于统计信息不全而引起的性能回退。提升了 TiDB 在复杂运行环境下的稳定性，降低了个别 TiDB 节点重启对整体服务的影响。

    更多信息，请参考[用户文档]()。

> 
> * 优化统计信息收集的对象 [#issue](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/issue) @[xuyifangreeneyes](https://github.com/xuyifangreeneyes) **tw:hfxsd**
> 
>     在 v7.1.0 中，TiDB 在收集优化器统计信息时，将会忽略一部分特殊的组件和列类型，从而加快了统计信息收集的速度，减少统计信息收集所消耗的系统资源。在一些特定场景，避免了统计信息收集造成的系统稳定性问题。
> 
>     更多信息，请参考[用户文档]()。

Author: ```suggestion
```

> 
> * 优化统计信息收集的对象 [#issue](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/issue) @[xuyifangreeneyes](https://github.com/xuyifangreeneyes) **tw:hfxsd**
> 
>     在 v7.1.0 中，TiDB 在收集优化器统计信息时，将会忽略一部分特殊的组件和列类型，从而加快了统计信息收集的速度，减少统计信息收集所消耗的系统资源。在一些特定场景，避免了统计信息收集造成的系统稳定性问题。
> 
>     更多信息，请参考[用户文档]()。

Author: ```suggestion
```

| [`tidb_opt_enable_late_materialization`](/system-variables.md#tidb_opt_enable_late_materialization-new-in-v700) | Modified | Changes the default value from `OFF` to `ON`, meaning that the TiFlash late materialization feature is enabled by default. |
| [`tidb_enable_dist_task`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_dist_task-new-in-v710) | Newly added | Controls whether to enable [the distributed execution framework](/tidb-distributed-execution-framework.md). After enabling distributed execution, DDL, Import and other supported backend tasks will be jointly completed by multiple TiDB nodes in the cluster. This variable was renamed from `tidb_ddl_distribute_reorg`. |
| [`tidb_enable_non_prepared_plan_cache_for_dml`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_non_prepared_plan_cache_for_dml-new-in-v710) | Newly added | Controls whether to enable the [Non-prepared plan cache](/sql-non-prepared-plan-cache.md) feature for DML statements. |

> | [`tidb_opt_fix_control`](/system-variables.md#tidb_opt_fix_control-new-in-v710) | Newly added | This variable provides a more fine-grained control over the optimizer and helps to prevent performance regression after upgrading caused by behavior changes in the optimizer. |

Author: ```suggestion
| [`tidb_opt_fix_control`](/system-variables.md#tidb_opt_fix_control-new-in-v710) | Newly added | This variable provides a more fine-grained control over the optimizer and helps to prevent performance regression after upgrading caused by behavior changes in the optimizer. |
| [`tidb_plan_cache_max_plan_size`](/system-variables.md#tidb_plan_cache_max_plan_size-new-in-v710) | Newly added | Controls the maximum size of a plan that can be cached in prepared or non-prepared plan cache. |
```

Author: @ran-huang PTAL

Reviewer 2: lgtm

---
title: TiDB 7.1.0 Release Notes
summary: Learn about the new features, compatibility changes, improvements, and bug fixes in TiDB 7.1.0.
---

# TiDB 7.1.0 Release Notes

TiDB version: 7.1.0 (upcoming)

> **Note:**
>
> TiDB v7.1.0 is not yet available. This preview of the release notes provides insights into an upcoming release and is subject to change. The features outlined here are not guaranteed to be included in the final release.

In v7.1.0, the key new features and improvements are as follows:

<table>
<thead>
  <tr>
    <th>Category</th>
    <th>Feature</th>
    <th>Description</th>
  </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
    <td rowspan="2">Scalability and Performance</td>
    <td>Session level non-prepared plan cache (GA)</td>
    <td>Support automatically reusing plan cache at the session level to reduce compilation and shorten the query time for the same SQL patterns without manually setting prepare statements in advance.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Load-based replica read</td>

>     <td>In a read hotspot scenario, TiDB can redirect read requests from the hotspot TiKV node to its replicas. This feature efficiently scatters read hotspots and optimizes the use of cluster resources. To control the threshold for triggering load-based replica read, you can adjust the system variable <code>tidb_load_based_replica_read_threshold</code>.</td>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    <td>In a read hotspot scenario, TiDB can redirect read requests for a hotspot TiKV node to its replicas. This feature efficiently scatters read hotspots and optimizes the use of cluster resources. To control the threshold for triggering load-based replica read, you can adjust the system variable <code>tidb_load_based_replica_read_threshold</code>.</td>
```

  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td rowspan="2">SQL</td>
    <td>Multi-valued index (GA)</td>

>     <td>Support MySQL-compatible multi-valued indexes and enhance the JSON type to improve the compatibility with MySQL 8.0. This feature improves the efficiency of membership checks on multi-valued columns.</td>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    <td>Support MySQL-compatible multi-valued indexes and enhance the JSON type to improve compatibility with MySQL 8.0. This feature improves the efficiency of membership checks on multi-valued columns.</td>
```

  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Generated columns (GA)</td>

>     <td>The value of a generated column is calculated by the SQL expression in the column definition in real time. This feature pushes some application logic to the database level, thus improving efficiency.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    <td>The value of a generated column is calculated by the SQL expression in the column definition in real time. This feature pushes some application logic to the database level, thus improving query efficiency.
```

    </td>
  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## Feature details

### Performance

* TiFlash supports late materialization (GA) [#5829](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/5829) @[Lloyd-Pottiger](https://github.com/Lloyd-Pottiger) **tw:qiancai**

>      In v7.0.0, TiFlash supports late materialization as an experimental feature for optimizing query performance. This feature is disabled by default (the [`tidb_opt_enable_late_materialization`](/system-variables.md#tidb_opt_enable_late_materialization-new-in-v700) system variable defaults to `OFF`). when processing a `SELECT` statement with filter conditions (`WHERE` clause), TiFlash reads all the data from the columns required by the query, and then filters and aggregates the data based on the query conditions. When Late materialization is enabled, TiDB supports pushing down part of the filter conditions to the TableScan operator. That is, TiFlash first scans the column data related to the filter conditions that are pushed down to the TableScan operator, filters the rows that meet the condition, and then scans the other column data of these rows for further calculation, thereby reducing IO scans and computations of data processing.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     In v7.0.0, TiFlash supports late materialization as an experimental feature for optimizing query performance. This feature is disabled by default (the [`tidb_opt_enable_late_materialization`](/system-variables.md#tidb_opt_enable_late_materialization-new-in-v700) system variable defaults to `OFF`). When processing a `SELECT` statement with filter conditions (`WHERE` clause), TiFlash reads all the data from the columns required by the query, and then filters and aggregates the data based on the query conditions. When Late materialization is enabled, TiDB supports pushing down part of the filter conditions to the TableScan operator. That is, TiFlash first scans the column data related to the filter conditions that are pushed down to the TableScan operator, filters the rows that meet the condition, and then scans the other column data of these rows for further calculation, thereby reducing IO scans and computations of data processing.
```

| [`tidb_enable_dist_task`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_dist_task-new-in-v710) | Newly added | Controls whether to enable [the distributed execution framework](/tidb-distributed-execution-framework.md). After enabling distributed execution, DDL, Import and other supported backend tasks will be jointly completed by multiple TiDB nodes in the cluster. This variable was renamed from `tidb_ddl_distribute_reorg`. |
| [`tidb_enable_non_prepared_plan_cache_for_dml`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_non_prepared_plan_cache_for_dml-new-in-v710) | Newly added | Controls whether to enable the [Non-prepared plan cache](/sql-non-prepared-plan-cache.md) feature for DML statements. |
| [`tidb_opt_fix_control`](/system-variables.md#tidb_opt_fix_control-new-in-v710) | Newly added | This variable provides a more fine-grained control over the optimizer and helps to prevent performance regression after upgrading caused by behavior changes in the optimizer. |

> | [`tidb_plan_cache_max_plan_size`](/system-variables.md#tidb_plan_cache_max_plan_size-new-in-v710) | Newly added | Controls the maximum size of a plan that can be cached in prepared or non-prepared plan cache. |

Author: ```suggestion
| [`tidb_plan_cache_invalidation_on_fresh_stats `](/system-variables.md#tidb_plan_cache_invalidation_on_fresh_stats-new-in-v710) | Newly added | Controls whether to invalidate the plan cache automatically when statistics on related tables are updated. |
| [`tidb_plan_cache_max_plan_size`](/system-variables.md#tidb_plan_cache_max_plan_size-new-in-v710) | Newly added | Controls the maximum size of a plan that can be cached in prepared or non-prepared plan cache. |
```
